Article
Auditory entrainment coordinates cortical-BNSTNAc triple time locking to alleviate the depressive
disorder
Authors
Xin Lv, Yuhan Wang, Yingying Zhang, ...,
Yunhao Wu, Valerie Voon, Bomin Sun
Correspondence
ku.ca.mac@742vv.com (V.V.),
bomin_sun@163.com (B.S.)
In brief
Lv et al. report synchronization induced
by music that activates antidepressant
responses in patients with depression.
This study finds oscillatory triple time
locking across the auditory cortex and
extended amygdala, emphasizing the role
of auditory entrainment in alleviating
depressive symptoms and points out the
critical pathway of music-modulated
oscillations.
Graphical abstract
Highlights
d Musical antidepressant effects are related to subjective
enjoyment
d Theta oscillations in the auditory area mediate the
antidepressant effects induced by music
d Identified triple temporal coupling pattern between the
auditory cortex, BNST, and NAc
d Auditory modulation can restore the triple temporal coupling
in deficits
ll
Lv et al., 2024, Cell Reports 43, 114474
August 27, 2024 ª 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2024.114474
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
Auditory entrainment coordinates
cortical-BNST-NAc triple time locking
to alleviate the depressive disorder
Xin Lv,1,2,5 Yuhan Wang,1,2,5 Yingying Zhang,1,3,5 Shuo Ma,1 Jie Liu,1,2 Kuanghao Ye,1,2 Yunhao Wu,1,2 Valerie Voon,1,3,4,*
and Bomin Sun1,2,6,*
1Center of Functional Neurosurgery, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China
2Department of Neurosurgery, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China
3Neural and Intelligence Engineering Centre, Institute of Science and Technology for Brain-Inspired Intelligence, Fudan University, Shanghai
200433, China
4Department of Psychiatry, Addenbrookes Hospital, University of Cambridge, CB2 0QQ Cambridge, UK
5These authors contributed equally
6Lead contact
*Correspondence: ku.ca.mac@742vv.com (V.V.), bomin_sun@163.com (B.S.)
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2024.114474
SUMMARY
Listening to music is a promising and accessible intervention for alleviating symptoms of major depressive
disorder. However, the neural mechanisms underlying its antidepressant effects remain unclear. In this study
on patients with depression, we used auditory entrainment to evaluate intracranial recordings in the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST) and nucleus accumbens (NAc), along with temporal scalp electroencephalogram (EEG). We highlight music-induced synchronization across this circuit. The synchronization initiates
with temporal theta oscillations, subsequently inducing local gamma oscillations in the BNST-NAc circuit.
Critically, the incorporated external entrainment induced a modulatory effect from the auditory cortex to
the BNST-NAc circuit, activating the antidepressant response and highlighting the causal role of physiological entrainment in enhancing the antidepressant response. Our study explores the pivotal role of the auditory
cortex and proposes a neural oscillation triple time-locking model, emphasizing the capacity of the auditory
cortex to access the BNST-NAc circuit.
INTRODUCTION
Depression poses a significant global public health challenge,
affecting approximately 4.4% of the world’s population, and is
a leading cause of disability worldwide.1 Approximately 50% of
patients with major depressive disorder (MDD) experience treatment-resistant depression (TRD), defined as a lack of response
to conventional therapeutic interventions.2 Novel antidepressant
treatments are urgently needed.
In the non-pharmacological treatment of depression, music
listening has emerged as an easily obtainable modulatory
approach with wide-ranging potential applications.3–5 Music
evokes emotions, making it a valuable tool for studying affective
responses and their neural correlates.6 Recent advancements in
the neuroscientific study of music-evoked emotions have
enhanced our understanding of the neural underpinnings of human emotion.7 Music’s ability to modulate neural activity in
subcortical brain structures via the auditory cortex suggests potential advancements in music-based treatments for psychiatric
disorders linked to dysfunction in these areas.8–10 However, the
response to music in TRD is typically suboptimal, with only a
small proportion of patients showing any response to music.
Music-induced emotion primarily engages the reward circuitry, with the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST), a
component of the extended amygdala, playing a pivotal role in
this circuit and participating in emotion-associated neural pathways.11,12 The BNST mediates reward-related behaviors such
as mating, with its activation potently stimulating a desire for
mating behavior in mice.13 In emotion processing, human imaging studies have shown that the amygdala and BNST have
similar functional properties, including sensitivity to ambiguous
threats.14 Both structures exhibit transient responses to threats
and demonstrate increased activity during sustained threat
exposure.15,16
The nucleus accumbens (NAc) also plays a crucial role in the
reward circuitry and is particularly sensitive to negative
emotional signals.17 Functionally, the BNST and NAc form an integrated network within this circuitry.18 Anatomical studies have
revealed that the GABAergic pathway from the BNST to the NAc
is implicated in depression-related neural responses.14 Activating the BNST can enhance NAc responses, potentially mitigating negative emotional experiences.19 Early impact studies
have linked music-induced emotions to activity in the BNSTNAc circuit.7,20,21
Cell Reports 43, 114474, August 27, 2024 ª 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/).
1
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
The primary mediators through which music influences the
reward circuitry are the auditory cortex and motor cortex. Music,
encoded in the primary auditory cortex, coordinates neuronal
activity and activates the reward circuitry, eliciting emotional responses. Martorell et al. confirmed that specific frequencies of
auditory stimulation can entrain auditory cortical neurons, shifting them from spontaneous irregular activity to coordinated
firing, resulting in neuroprotective effects.22
Here, we aim to investigate how music listening influences
subcortical nuclei in the reward circuitry via the auditory cortex.
We do this by simultaneously recording temporal electroencephalogram (EEG) signals from the scalp and intracranial recordings
from the BNST and NAc in patients with TRD. This approach offers unique insights into the mechanisms underlying the antidepressant effects and potential strategies for optimizing treatment
to enhance patients’ responsiveness to auditory modulation.
RESULTS
Musical enjoyment differentiates the depression
alleviation effect of music in TRD
To explore the fundamental influence of music on emotions
across various groups, we enrolled 23 patients with TRD and implanted electrodes in the BNST-NAc circuit for future MDD treatment via deep brain stimulation (DBS) (Figures S1A–S1D). With
these electrodes and conventional scalp EEG, we could synchronously collect cortical-subcortical EEG signals. Since the
primary cortical structure studied here is the auditory cortex,
we concentrated on EEG signals in the temporal area.
Acknowledging the potential impact of music familiarity,
emotional content, and individual preferences on music-induced
emotions, the 23 participants were divided based on music familiarity: unfamiliar (UF) condition and familiar (FA) condition.
The UF group, comprising 13 participants, was used to investigate the influence of the emotional context of music on depressive mood. Participants’ preferences for music and their
emotional responses were recorded using a visual analog scale.
Interviews showed that they lacked a classical music listening
history due to an Asian cultural background. Therefore, two classical music segments with distinct emotional contexts were chosen: Tchaikovsky’s Symphony No. 6, representing sadness, and
the third movement of Beethoven’s Symphony No. 7, representing joy and excitement (Figure 1A).23,24 Patients were randomly
assigned to two groups, each receiving a different music
segment. We assessed depression symptom-related scores using a visual analog scale for depression (VAS-D) and visual
analog scale for anxiety (VAS-A) both before and after music
listening, alongside an enjoyment score for the music itself, visual analog scale for enjoyment (VAS-E).25–31 The scale
results indicated no significant difference in depression symptoms between patients exposed to the two music schemes
(Figures 1B, S2A, and 2B). This suggests that the therapeutic effects of music listening on patients with TRD may be independent of the emotional context, consistent with previous
research.32
Given the minimal influence of music’s emotional content, 10
of the initial 23 participants were defined as the FA group. This
group examined how subjective preferences affected emotions
with familiar music. Researchers created an 8-segment playlist,
ensuring no participant had heard the pieces in the past year.
Participants listened to these segments three times daily for
14 days to reach a similar familiarity level. They then rated their
preferences, identifying their most and least favorite pieces
(scoring highest/lowest, surpassing mean score ±1 standard
deviation). In the experiment, participants were split into two
subgroups: one listened to their most preferred music (high
enjoyment, HE) and the other to their least preferred (low enjoyment, LE). The results showed a significant impact of subjective
preference on music’s emotional effects.
The FA group results indicate that music alleviates depressive
mood based solely on individual enjoyment. To validate this in
the UF group, we showed symptom improvement correlated
with music enjoyment using linear analysis (Figure 1C). Based
on these results, spatial clustering was performed using VAS-E
scales and VAS-D and VAS-A improvements. The K-means algorithm initially clustered patients into high- and low-enjoyment
groups, with high enjoyment linked to better depression symptom improvement. After grouping, a K-nearest neighbor algorithm determined the decision boundary between the groups
(Figure 1D).
The study design was as follows. After electrode implantation,
participants were randomly divided into music listening groups,
with BNST-NAc circuit and temporal EEG recorded. Post-session, they were assessed via a visual analog scale. Poor responders were reorganized for another session with exogenous
sound modulation, with recordings and assessments repeated
(Figure 1E).
Bridging temporal EEG signal to musical appreciation
via LSTM-based deep learning method
We initially observed that an individual’s music enjoyment level
was most strongly correlated with the emotional improvement
induced by the music (as shown in Figure 1C). Based on these
findings, we delved deeper into understanding the brain’s
response to different levels of music appreciation. EEG data
from the temporal region predominantly reflected activity in the
primary auditory cortex.
Before delving deeper, it was crucial to link auditory cortical
activity with music appreciation, reflecting depressive mood
improvement. Due to our small dataset, we integrated a
similar external dataset. The naturalistic music EEG dataset
included 20 healthy participants, 200 trials, 64-channel EEG
data, and participants’ self-evaluations of music appreciation.33
We analyzed the dataset using an long short-term memory
(LSTM)-based recurrent neural network (RNN) due to its ability
to handle long-term dependencies better than traditional
RNNs. LSTM’s memory cells enable selective information retention and deletion, crucial for time-sensitive tasks (Figure 2A).
Details regarding the partitioning of the training, test, and validation sets, along with the rationale, are provided in the STAR
Methods. After 500 training batches, the model showed promising predictive metrics: approximately 84% accuracy, with
recall and precision both at 83%, and satisfactory generalization
abilities (Figure 2B). These results suggest that a basic deep
learning framework can effectively predict music enjoyment
levels from EEG waveforms. This supports the representation
2
Cell Reports 43, 114474, August 27, 2024
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
of multi-dimensional electrophysiological signals in music
perception. It reaffirms previous high/low enjoyment classifications and sheds light on the critical role of temporal EEG in
modulating music appreciation.
Modulatory effects of music on temporal EEG based on
synchronization
As the patients had varying responses to music, the specific
impact of music listening on temporal EEG remained an area
of exploration. Through the analysis of waveforms and spectrograms, we observed induced theta activity in the temporal EEG
of the HE subgroup, a phenomenon absent in the LE subgroup
(Figures 3A and 3B). Quantitative statistical analysis of power
in the theta frequency band confirmed this observation in both
FA and UF subjects, with the HE subgroups exhibiting significantly stronger theta band power (Figure 3C). Furthermore, we
observed a denser incidence, higher peak amplitude, and longer
duration of theta waves in the HE group (Figures S2C–S2F).
Given the modulatory role of theta activity, we hypothesized
that enhanced theta band activity was associated with an
increased modulatory effect of music on temporal EEG. Subsequently, we computed Z scores for both EEG and music waveforms for normalization and determined coherence, which was
quantified by the weighted phase lag index (wPLI). The results
indicated that the coherence between temporal EEG and music
waveforms in the HE subgroups was notably higher, leading to a
greater number of highlighted time windows (Figure 3D). This
suggests that individuals with higher enjoyment of music
A
B E
C
D
Figure 1. Musical enjoyment differentiates
the depression alleviation effect of music in
TRD
(A) Patients underwent music treatment while
recording LFPs in the BNST-NAc circuit and temporal EEG signals. Twenty-three subjects were first
randomly divided into two groups with differentiated
familiarity backgrounds. For the UF background, 13
of 23 subjects received UF music that represented
distinct emotional colors. The former group was
named ‘‘sadness,’’ and the latter group was named
‘‘excitement.’’ The remained 10 subjects received
familiar (FA) background music, which was defined
as being played continuously for 14 days to get a
high and close level of familiarity among them. After
14 days, participants were randomly divided into
two groups. One group listened to their most enjoyed music, while the other group listened to their
most disliked music.
(B) Comparison of visual depression and anxiety
scores on the VAS-D and VAS-A between the
sadness and excitement groups after music
listening. The results showed no significant difference in depression-related symptoms between the
two groups (unpaired t test, n = 6 in excitement, n =
7 in sadness, n = 5 in high enjoyment, n = 5 in low
enjoyment). The central line in the graph represents
the mean value, while the error bars indicate the
standard error of the mean (SEM).
(C) Correlation analysis between the degree of
music appreciation and improvement in depressive symptoms (n = 13). There was a significant
linear regression relationship between patients’
VAS-E, VAS-D, and VAS-A before and after music
listening, indicating that the antidepressant effect
of music on TRD may be related to patients’ own
level of music enjoyment. The central line represents the mean value, while the shaded area indicates the SEM.
(D) Patients were re-grouped based on scale results. Using VAS-D, VAS-A, and VAS-E scores,
combined with spatial clustering methods and
K-nearest neighbors for decision boundary
calculation.
(E) Summary of the entire experimental procedure.
Cell Reports 43, 114474, August 27, 2024
3
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
B
C
exhibited greater synchronization between the music and EEG.
Conversely, the LE subgroups likely experienced reduced
musical engagement, as evidenced by lower synchronization.
This phenomenon was observed in both FA and UF conditions.
Temporal theta oscillations regulate BNST-NAc
activation in responses to music enjoyment
The activation of the reward circuitry represents a neural mechanism underlying the brain’s response to external sensory stimuli. In this study, we simultaneously recorded local field potential
(LFP) activities from the BNST and NAc, both of which are components of the reward circuit. Gamma oscillations in LFPs may
be recognized as biomarkers of functional synchronization within
these nuclei.34 We observed induced gamma oscillations in the
LFP waveforms of the BNST in the HE subgroups (Figure 4A). Us
A
Figure 2. Bridging temporal EEG signals to
musical appreciation via an LSTM-based
deep learning method
(A) Constructed using a deep learning algorithm
based on long short-term memory (LSTM), the
dataset was partitioned, and the output results
were determined.
(B) Changes in accuracy on the validation set as
the number of epochs increases. After 500 epochs, an accuracy of 0.84, precision of 0.83, and
recall of 0.83 were achieved, indicating that temporal EEG signals can effectively classify the
subgroupings shown in Figure 1D.
(C) Changes in loss on the training set as the
number of epochs increases. It can be observed
that, as the training process achieves good classification accuracy, there was no significant
overfitting.
ing specific algorithms, we independently
identified gamma oscillations in both the
BNST and NAc and calculated their incidence. The statistical findings revealed
significantly higher gamma activities in
the BNST of the reward circuit for the
HE subgroup, indicating pronounced
music-induced activation (Figures 4B,
4C, S3A–S3F). For the NAc, significant
enhancement of gamma activity was
observed only in UF patients within the
subgroup, while this phenomenon was
not evident in FA patients.
Activity within the reward circuit does
not operate in isolation.35 We examined
its interaction with music-modulated
temporal EEG theta activity, focusing on
gamma oscillations within the circuit.
Phase-locking analysis showed a significant increase in BNST gamma within
specific temporal theta phases for the
HE subgroups (Figure 4D). Notably, this
synchronization of BNST gamma with
specific temporal theta phases was
observed in both FA and UF groups. This indicates that musicdriven temporal theta oscillations enhance the phase-locked
activation of the BNST via gamma oscillations, potentially forming a temporal relationship known as nesting.
In our exploration of the neural coupling between the temporal
area and the BNST, we introduced the ‘‘nesting’’ paradigm. This
paradigm involves maintaining a consistent and precise temporal lag between a modulated neural oscillation and the specific
phase of its upstream oscillations.36 We extracted gamma oscillations nested within temporal theta oscillations and categorized
BNST gamma as ‘‘nested’’ or ‘‘non-nested’’ in relation to temporal theta oscillations. Analysis showed a higher prevalence of
nested gamma oscillations in the HE subgroups compared to
LE, observed in both FA and UF subjects (Figures 4E and
S3G). Non-nested BNST gamma oscillations did not differ
4
Cell Reports 43, 114474, August 27, 2024
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
A B C
D
Figure 3. Synchronized modulatory effects of music treatment on temporal EEG
(A) Schematic of temporal EEG theta band filtered raw waveforms and spectrograms in the HE subgroup subject.
(B) Schematic of temporal EEG theta band filtered raw waveforms and spectrograms in the LE subject.
(C) Comparison of theta band power between the LE and HE subgroups. The two panels on the left represent the UF background group, while the two panels on
the right represent the FA background group. In both backgrounds of UF and FA, the HE subgroups exhibited significantly higher theta band power (n = 8 in LE UF,
n = 5 in HE UF, n = 5 in LE FA, n = 5 in HE FA, one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s test). The central line represents the mean value, while the error bars indicate the SEM.
(D) Heatmap illustrating the synchronization between music waveforms and temporal EEG.
significantly between HE and LE in the UF condition (Figure 4F).
The nesting index was significantly higher in the HE subgroup
(Figure 4G). In FA subjects, the HE subgroup showed more
frequent nested and increased non-nested gamma activity, likely
due to elevated baseline gamma (Figures 4E–4G). Overall,
regardless of music familiarity, enjoyment aligned induced theta
and gamma activity within the reward circuit through phase
nesting.
Synthesizing these results, in the HE subgroups, elevated
gamma oscillations linked to reward circuit activation were
mainly synchronized with temporal theta oscillations. We averaged theta waveforms before and after each nested gamma
oscillation. The HE subgroups showed pronounced periodic
theta activity during the gamma time window (Figures 4H
and 4I), while the LE subgroups lacked strong periodic behavior
(Figures 4H and 4I). For non-nested gamma, similar analysis revealed reduced theta amplitude without forming oscillations
and no significant waveform differences between the groups.
This suggests an intrinsic modulatory mechanism in the HE
subgroups.
Triple time-locked oscillatory activity in the corticoBNST-NAc circuit mediates the depression alleviation
effect of music
Based on the intricate interactions between the BNST and NAc
within the reward circuit and the modulatory effect from the temporal area to the BNST, we hypothesized the existence of a triple
time-locked oscillatory activity as a potential modulatory mechanism induced by music listening. Further studies were required
to validate this hypothesis (Figure 5A).
Cell Reports 43, 114474, August 27, 2024
5
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
A B C
D E F G
H
I
Figure 4. Temporal theta oscillations regulate BNST-NAc activation in responses to musical appreciation
(A) Schematic of BNST-LFP gamma band filtered waveforms and their spectrograms in a subject from the HE subgroup.
(B) Comparison of gamma oscillation occurrence rates in BNST LFP between the LE and HE subgroups. In both backgrounds of FA and UF, the HE subgroups
had significantly higher gamma oscillation occurrence rates than the LE subgroup (n = 8 in LE UF, n = 5 in HE UF, n = 5 in LE FA, n = 5 in HE FA, one-way ANOVA
with Tukey’s test). The central line represents the mean value, while the error bars indicate the SEM.
(C) Comparison of gamma oscillation occurrence rates in NAc LFP (n = 8 in LE UF, n = 5 in HE UF, n = 5 in LE FA, n = 5 in HE FA, one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s test).
The central line represents the mean value, while the error bars indicate the SEM.
(D) In both background of UF and FA, phase-locking analysis of BNST gamma to temporal EEG theta in the HE subgroup and the LE subgroup. BNST gamma
exhibited significantly higher amplitude around 120 of temporal EEG theta phase (n = 8 in LE UF, n = 5 in HE UF, n = 5 in LE FA, n = 5 in HE FA, unpaired t test).
(legend continued on next page)
6 Cell Reports 43, 114474, August 27, 2024
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Emotional reactions usually involve enhanced signal outputs
from the BNST to the NAc. In this study, they were both activated
in the HE subgroups under the modulatory music. We postulated
that listening to music would impact the reward circuit via the
auditory cortex. Consequently, the coordinated activity in the
BNST-NAc was examined. Temporal coupling serves as a critical index for describing their synchronicity. We quantified
the time lag from BNST-gamma to NAc-gamma, extracting
gamma pairings with time lags less than 50 ms as gammagamma couplings. The results revealed that the subgroups in
both familiarity conditions exhibited significantly denser occurrences of gamma-gamma coupling (Figures 5B and S3H).
Regardless of participants’ music familiarity, HE subgroups
consistently showed more frequent coupling. In participants
familiar with but disliking the music, we scarcely observed the
occurrence of gamma coupling, indicating that BNST-NAc
gamma coupling may be a characteristic feature of reward circuit
activation during the music appreciation process (Figure 5B).
Furthermore, temporal coupling relationships were more
closely aligned, with significantly shorter latencies for all
gamma-coupling events in the HE subgroups (Figure 5C).
We discussed temporal dynamics within gamma coupling to
further describe the transduction process. In UF conditions,
there was no significant difference in BNST gamma and NAc
gamma involvement between HE and LE subgroups. However,
in FA conditions, BNST gamma and NAc gamma involvement
in the LE subgroup was significantly lower than in the HE subgroups (Figures 5D and 5E), indicating lower activation.
Regarding the temporal relationships of gamma coupling, we
analyzed the distribution of NAc-gamma before and after each
BNST-gamma coupling and averaged them. HE subgroups
showed higher distributions of NAc-gamma around BNSTgamma, predominantly centered around the coupling time point
(Figures 5F and 5G). Additionally, the lower incidence of gamma
coupling in LE subgroups was partly due to the disproportionately low proportion of single nucleus involvement in coupling.
After identifying the modulation of temporal theta on the BNST
and the gamma coupling within BNST-NAc, it was necessary to
understand how music listening influences multiple nuclei within
the reward circuit through the activity of the auditory cortex. To
achieve this, we examined the co-occurrence of these three
components. Co-occurrence refers to the temporal synchronization of three distinct dimensions of electrical activity. Specifically, if a single BNST gamma activity both forms nesting with
temporal theta and exhibits temporal coupling with NAc-gamma,
then it is defined as a tri-time-locked event. Statistical results revealed that the occurrence rate of tri-time-locked events in the
HE subgroups were significantly higher than in the LE subgroups
(Figures 5H and S3I). It is noteworthy that, due to the low activation level of the reward circuit, the FA but disliked group did not
observe any triple coupling phenomena whatsoever. Furthermore, the theta-gamma nesting and BNST-NAc gamma
coupling in tri-time-locked events were predominantly synchronized around the time point of music-induced gamma oscillation,
indicating the direct modulatory impact of music on the reward
circuit through the auditory cortex. Based on the observed clinical efficacy of music and the pronounced neural mechanisms
revealed, we proposed that the positive effects are closely
related to its impact on reward circuit activation and temporal
lobe engagement. Its involvement in theta-gamma nesting was
also substantial, averaging around 50%, a notably higher proportion compared to the LE subgroups in both familiarity conditions (Figure 5I).
The physiological implications of tri-time-locked phenomena
required further validation. According to the hypothesis we
have presented, tri-time-locked events are indicative of
enhanced functional interactions within the reward circuit
induced by music through the auditory cortex. To investigate
whether the music-evoked auditory response would modulate
BNST-NAc synchronization, we extracted the coherence between music and temporal EEG within a window of 250 ms
before and after each tri-time-locked event, which we referred
to as the ‘‘surrounding locking period wPLI,’’ and the FA and
LE subgroups did not have data on triple coupling because no
instances of triple coupling were observed in this group (Figure 5J). Analyzing the averaged wPLI from those groups, it was
evident that the HE subgroups exhibited a coherence peak
before the locking time point (Figure 5K). This suggests a temporal sequence where the synchronization between music and
temporal EEG heightened first, followed by the triple activation
of the auditory cortex induced by music within the reward circuit.
In stark contrast, the UF and LE group displayed a delayed peak
in their coherence waveform after the locking time point, reflecting a disrupted temporal relationship (Figure 5L).
Despite the absence of triple coupling in the FA low-enjoyment
group, the FA high-enjoyment group still exhibited a trend in
wPLI similar to the UF and HE group: peaking before the time
point of triple coupling (Figure 5M). When examining the

(E) Comparison of occurrence rates of gamma oscillation nested within temporal EEG theta in both the HE subgroups and the LE subgroups (n = 8 in LE UF, n = 5
in HE UF, n = 5 in LE FA, n = 5 in HE FA, one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s test). The central line represents the mean value, while the error bars indicate the SEM.
(F) Comparison of occurrence rates of gamma oscillation non-nested within temporal EEG theta (n = 8 in LE UF, n = 5 in HE UF, n = 5 in LE FA, n = 5 in HE FA, oneway ANOVA with Tukey’s test). The central line represents the mean value, while the error bars indicate the SEM.
(G) Comparison of nesting index, illustrating the temporal relationship of theta-gamma nesting. In both backgrounds of UF and FA, the HE subgroups showed
significantly higher gamma oscillation occurrence rates than the LE subgroups (n = 8 in LE UF, n = 5 in HE UF, n = 5 in LE FA, n = 5 in HE FA, one-way ANOVA with
Tukey’s test). The central line represents the mean value, while the error bars indicate the SEM.
(H) In both backgrounds of UF and FA, EEG theta waveforms around the nested gamma peak amplitude were averaged 250 ms before and after, revealing more
rhythmic oscillatory modulation in the HE subgroup (for the left, n = 237 in UF HE, n = 144 in UF LE; for the right, n = 522 in UF HE, n = 3 in UF LE). The gray semitransparent region, spanning 50 ms before and after the gamma peak time, depicts the gamma oscillation activity window. The lines represent the mean theta
waveform, and the shaded area indicates the standard deviation.
(I) In the UF background group, the average non-nested gamma peak amplitude before and after 250 ms of EEG theta band filtered data showed no significant
difference between the two groups (n = 3,492 in the HE subgroup, n = 4,088 in the LE subgroup). Similarly, in the FA background group, the average also showed
no significant difference between the two subgroups (n = 5,193 in the HE subgroup, n = 58 in the LE subgroup).
Cell Reports 43, 114474, August 27, 2024
7
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article




D E
A B C
F
G
H I
J
K L
M
(legend on next page)
8
Cell Reports 43, 114474, August 27, 2024
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
distribution of the latency from the wPLI peak to the occurrence
of triple time locking, the HE group showed a distribution peak
before the triple time locking, while the LE group exhibited a
trough before the triple time locking (Fig.S3J).
Auditory entrainment promoted triple time locking
synchrony in unresponsive patients
In the results mentioned, LE subgroups under both familiarity
conditions showed no response to music processing, indicating
unresponsiveness. To enhance therapeutic outcomes for such
patients, we aimed to increase temporal area synchronicity. Prior
research has shown that external sound can induce neural oscillations in the auditory cortex.22 To investigate the impact of auditory entrainment on unresponsive patients, we plan to incorporate modulatory sounds at specific frequencies into music that
these patients have previously listened to but have shown poor
responsiveness. Specifically, for subjects in the FA and UF LE
subgroups, we selected the same music to which they had
been exposed previously during their music treatment sessions.
This music underwent two audio modifications: modulatory
sound integration for the modulatory group (MODU) and highfrequency sound incorporation for the sham procedure group
(SHAM) (Figure 6A).
Participants first listened to the modulating version, followed
by the SHAM version. Prior to the experiment, assessments using the VAS-D and VAS-A were conducted. After each listening,
participants were re-assessed using the VAS-E, VAS-D, and
VAS-A scales. Participants exhibited significantly higher levels
of enjoyment for the modulating music compared to the SHAM
counterpart. Additionally, in both conditions of familiarity, the
modulated subjects showed a significant reduction in depressive symptoms (Figures 6B and 6C).
To assess the activation levels of single nuclei, we also extracted the incidence of gamma oscillations as our evaluative
metric. In UF subjects, the gamma incidence of BNST and NAc
showed no significant difference between the modulated and
the controlled subgroups, while the FA subjects kept significantly lower gamma incidence under control (Figures 6D, 6E,
S4A–S4C). Meanwhile, modulated music significantly increase
phase-locking of theta to BNST-gamma in both FA and UF
groups (Figures 6F and S4D–S4G). This observation was further
supported by a significant rise in both gamma nesting incidence
and nesting index within the modulation group compared to the
SHAM subgroups in both familiarity conditions (Figures 6F–6I
and S5A).
When overlaying average theta oscillation waveforms before
and after nested gamma oscillations, we showed that the UF
MODU group exhibited more consistent periodic activity around
gamma, while the UF SHAM group displayed more erratic patterns (Figure 6J). In the FA condition, due to the observation of
only one nesting under SHAM sound, statistical analysis was
not feasible, but it generally maintained this trend. FA subjects
showed patterns similar to UF subjects (Figure 6K).
Auditory modulation did result in a notable rise in gamma
coupling rates, accompanied by a significantly reduced
coupling latency in both familiarity conditions (Figures 7A, 7B,
and S5B). This suggests an enhanced involvement of gamma
oscillations originating from both the BNST and NAc in the
coupling mechanism (Figures 7C and 7D). With respect to
the inherent temporal relationships within this coupling, the
MODU subgroups exhibited patterns similar to those observed
in the HE group: a greater concentration of NAc-gamma oscillations around the time of BNST-gamma coupling (Figures 7E
and 7F). Importantly, there was a pronounced increase in the

Figure 5. Triple time-locked oscillatory activity in the cortico-BNST-NAc circuit mediates the depression alleviation effect of music
(A) Schematic of triple time locking.
(B) Comparison of the incidence of gamma-gamma coupling in the BNST-NAc circuit (n = 8 in LE UF, n = 5 in HE UF, n = 5 in LE FA, n = 5 in HE FA, one-way ANOVA
with Tukey’s test). The central line represents the mean value, while the error bars indicate the SEM.
(C) Comparison of the latency of gamma-gamma coupling in the BNST-NAc circuit (n = 8 in LE UF, n = 5 in HE UF, n = 5 in LE FA, n = 5 in HE FA, one-way ANOVA
with Tukey’s test, n = 1,257 for the HE subgroup versus n = 2,601 for the LE subgroup, n = 3,128 for the HE subgroup versus n = 52 for the LE subgroup). The
central line represents the mean value, while the error bars indicate the SEM.
(D) Comparison of the participants in coupling of BNST gamma oscillations (n = 8 in LE UF, n = 5 in HE UF, n = 5 in LE FA, n = 5 in HE FA, one-way ANOVA with
Tukey’s test). The central line represents the mean value, while the error bars indicate the SEM.
(E) Comparison of the participants of NAc gamma oscillations in coupling (n = 8 in LE UF, n = 5 in HE UF, n = 5 in LE FA, n = 5 in HE FA, one-way ANOVA with
Tukey’s test). The central line represents the mean value, while the error bars indicate the SEM.
(F) Temporal relationship within gamma-gamma coupling events in the UF background group. Using the BNST-gamma occurrence as the zero point, NAcgamma incidence was plotted. It could be observed that the HE subgroup exhibits a stronger tendency of NAc-gamma occurrence around BNST-gamma,
indicating that BNST-gamma recruits NAc-gamma.
(G) Temporal relationship within gamma-gamma coupling events in the FA background group.
(H) Comparison of the occurrence rate of triple time-locking events (n = 8 in LE UF, n = 5 in HE UF, n = 5 in LE FA, n = 5 in HE FA, one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s
test). The central line represents the mean value, while the error bars indicate the SEM.
(I) Comparison of the participants of theta-gamma nesting in triple time-locking events (n = 8 in LE UF, n = 5 in HE UF, n = 5 in LE FA, n = 5 in HE FA, one-way
ANOVA with Tukey’s test). The central line represents the mean value, while the error bars indicate the SEM.
(J) Heatmap showing the synchronization analysis results between music and auditory cortical activity within the peri-triple time-locking time window.
(K) Comparison of the average peri-triple time-locking wPLI in the UF background of HE and LE and the FA background of HE (n = 54 in LE UF, n = 134 in HE UF,
n = 226 in HE FA, one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s test). The averaging was done over a time window before and after each triple time-locking event, highlighting the
overall synchronization comparison while mitigating variations within the time window.
(L) In the UF background group, wPLI was averaged within the peri-triple-time-locking window, showing synchronization between music and auditory cortical
responses. There was a peak around 50 ms before triple time locking (n = 134 in UF HE and n = 54 in UF LE). The central line represents the mean value, while the
shaded area indicate the SEM.
(M) In the UF background group, wPLI was averaged within the peri-triple time-locking window (n = 226 in FA HE). The central line represents the mean value,
while the error bars indicate the SEM.
Cell Reports 43, 114474, August 27, 2024
9
C
D
E
F G
H
I
A B
ll
OPEN ACCESS
J
K
Article
(legend on next page)
10
Cell Reports 43, 114474, August 27, 2024
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
triple time locking of temporal EEG-BNST-NAc within the
MODU group, with its surrounding locking period wPLI significantly exceeding that of the SHAM subgroups (Figures 7G,
7H, and S5C). After averaging the peri-locking wPLI, coherence
peaks preceding the locking point were also evident. However,
in the SHAM group, this peak appeared with a delayed onset,
resembling the scenario without modulatory integration
(triple time locking was absent in FA subjects; Figures 7I–7K
and S5D). As observed previously before noise entrainment, a
similar phenomenon was absent around BNST gamma events
or NAc gamma events (Figures S6A–S7L). This indicates functional integration within the cortex-BNST-NAc circuit rather
than a music-evoked antidepressant effect mediated by a single nucleus.
DISCUSSION
Music can evoke strong emotions and is critical to insights in
reward and emotion neuroscience.37 The mechanisms of temporal and network dynamics of music on the deeper reward circuitry underlying the antidepressant response remain underexplored.7 Depending on an individual’s level of enjoyment, music
selectively mediates activation of the auditory cortex and propagates through consistent temporal windows to subcortical
nuclei of the BNST-NAc reward circuit. Critically, using sound
modulation, we emphasize the causal role of auditory entrainment in enhancing the triple time-locked synchrony of gamma
activity in the BNST and NAc circuit. These findings have
mechanistic implications for how music influences reward
and emotional circuitry.7 In the UF condition, patients were previously naive to the classical music played but were still able to
accurately discern the emotional context of music, similar to
conventional definitions highlighting the universality of the
musical segments. Concurrently, this was also validated among
participants who had prior familiarity with the music. It is noteworthy that, among the FA and aversive participants, we
observed a complete lack of integration in the BNST-NAc circuitry. Furthermore, no evidence of modulation by the auditory
cortex was observed, resulting in the complete disappearance
of the triadic coupling phenomenon. The results showed that
the improvement of depressive symptoms was not linked to
the emotion of the music itself but was correlated with the patient’s level of music enjoyment. This observation is consistent
with reports by Zhou et al. suggesting that the impact of
external sounds on pain perception thresholds is independent
of the emotional inclination of the music.32 Indeed, in our study,
the patients with TRD who did not enjoy the music lacked an
auditory temporal EEG cortical response to the music and
failed to activate their reward circuitry. We thus focused on
our comparisons on those with high versus low enjoyment of
music.
Theta oscillations typically reflect distributed neural synchronization on a larger spatial scale. The medial temporal lobe is one
of the important cortical sources of theta oscillations. Its rhythmicity can integrate information exchange across brain regions.
Possibly through this pathway, music further heightened gamma
activity in the BNST and NAc in this group, indicating engagement of a reward circuit. Critically, the network showed a stable
phase relationship between the auditory cortical EEG-theta and
subcortical BNST-gamma.
Gamma oscillations reflect the enhanced local information exchange. When gamma oscillations occur in a relatively constant
temporal relationship with the phase of low-frequency rhythms,
coupling between the two emerges, reflecting synchronized activity and information exchange between neuron clusters. We
further observed greater gamma coupling between the BNST
and NAc. Thus, we propose a triple time-locked synchronization
network model underlying the depression alleviation effect of

Figure 6. Auditory entrainment activated response to music in unresponsive patients
(A) Schematic of modulatory sound overlaid on the original waveform. The red line represents the waveform of auditory entrainment, while the yellow line
represents the waveform of SHAM noise. The black line represents the original waveform of music.
(B) Comparison of the results of three visual rating scales in the UF background. Shown at the top is the comparison of VAS-E ratings when patients listened to
both types of music (n = 8, paired t test), at the center are the VAS-D ratings (n = 8, repeated measures analysis of variance [RM-ANOVA] with Dunnett’s test), and
at the bottom are the VAS-A ratings (RM-ANOVA with Dunnett’s test).
(C) Comparison of the results of three visual rating scales in the FA background (n = 5, paired t test and RM-ANOVA with Dunnett’s test). The central line in the
graph represents the mean value, while the error bars indicate the SEM.
(D) Comparison of BNST-gamma occurrence rates (n = 8, paired t test). The central line in the graph represents the mean value, while the error bars indicate
the SEM.
(E) Comparison of NAc-gamma occurrence rates (n = 5, paired t test). The central line in the graph represents the mean value, while the error bars indicate
the SEM.
(F) Comparison of the nesting incidence of theta-gamma (n = 8, paired t test). The central line in the graph represents the mean value, while the error bars indicate
the SEM.
(G) Comparison of the occurrence incidence of non-nested gamma (n = 5, paired t test). The central line in the graph represents the mean value, while the error
bars indicate the SEM.
(H) In both backgrounds of UF and FA, phase locking analysis of BNST gamma to temporal EEG theta in the MODU subgroup and the SHAM subgroup. BNST
gamma exhibited a significantly higher amplitude around 120 of temporal EEG theta phase (n = 8 in UF and n = 5 in FA, unpaired t test).
(I) Comparison of the nesting index (n = 8 in UF and n = 5 in FA, unpaired t test).
(J) In the UF background group (left), the average EEG theta waveforms around the nested gamma peak amplitude show more rhythmic modulation in the MODU
subgroup (n = 1093) and SHAM subgroup (n = 236). In the FA background group, the MODU subgroup (n = 522) was comparable to the UF group, while the SHAM
group only found one triple time-locking event (n = 1). The gray semi-transparent region, spanning 50 ms before and after the gamma peak time, represents the
time window of gamma oscillation activity.
(K) In the UF background group, there was no significant difference between the MODU subgroup (n = 8,159) and the SHAM group (n = 8,471) in the average EEG
theta band filtered data around the non-nested gamma peak amplitude. In the FA background group, the same comparison was made with the MODU subgroup
(n = 5,193) and the SHAM group (n = 72). The lines in the graph represent the mean theta waveform, and the shaded area represents the standard deviation.
Cell Reports 43, 114474, August 27, 2024
11
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article


A B C D
E G H
I
J
K
F
Figure 7. Auditory entrainment promoted triple time-locking synchrony and mediated the depression alleviation effect
(A) Comparison of the incidence of gamma-gamma coupling in the BNST-NAc circuit in both the MODU subgroups and the SHAM subgroups. In both backgrounds, the MODU subgroups show significantly higher gamma coupling incidence (paired t test, n = 8, p = 0.0025 for MODU UF versus SHAM UF; paired t test,
n = 5, p < 0.0001 for MODU FA versus SHAM FA).
(B) Comparison of the latency of gamma-gamma coupling in the BNST-NAc circuit (one-way ANOVA, n = 1904 in MODU UF versus n = 1416 in SHAM UF,
p < 0.0001; n = 2962 in MODU FA versus n = 17 in SHAM FA, p = 0.0136).
(C) Comparison of BNST gamma oscillation participants in gamma coupling events (paired t test, n = 8, p = 0.0029 for MODU UF versus SHAM UF; paired t test,
n = 5, p = 0.0035 for MODU FA versus SHAM FA).
(legend continued on next page)
12 Cell Reports 43, 114474, August 27, 2024
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
music, defined by auditory cortical-subcortical theta nesting and
gamma coupling with the BNST-NAc reward network, as shown
in Figure 1A.36
The capacity for sensory stimuli in oscillatory modes to modulate corresponding neural oscillations in the stimulated cortical
structures has been observed.38–41 Observing theta engagement in the auditory cortex, we introduced auditory entrainment
using modulatory sound to assess its potential effect. Musical
modulation is associated with an improvement in depressive
symptoms, suggesting a behavioral impact.
The BNST receives synaptic transmissions and functional outputs directly from the central amygdala and interacts with other
relevant nuclei to form a functional complex termed the
extended amygdala.42 Given the functional congruence between the BNST and amygdala, the BNST likely plays a pivotal
role in the pathophysiology and treatment of depressive disorders. Imaging studies show activation of the NAc and BNST in
response to pleasurable music.21 Xiao et al. have shown that
the GABAergic pathway from the BNST to the NAc mediates
the generation of depression-related negative emotions.19
The NAc plays a crucial role in processing rewards and motivations, showing heightened activity during music-induced
emotional experiences. Previous studies have revealed the
involvement of the entire reward pathway in emotional reactions
to music.21,43
Our study integrates various research findings, revealing a
cortical-subcortical pathway from the auditory cortex to the
reward circuits in the BNST and NAc. This pathway, confirmed
indirectly by prior studies, plays a key role in mediating music’s antidepressant effects based on individual appreciation
levels. Activation of this pathway is primarily influenced by
personal preferences rather than musical context. Familiarity
with the music might enhance this effect, as seen in low preference ratings and absent circuit signals in familiar but disliked
music.
Limitations of the study
Due to sample size, environmental factors, and data resolution,
oscillatory alteration may be individualized. Precise information
exchange occurs between neural nuclei, especially in neurons
firing at specific phases during excitatory-inhibitory cycles. Current DBS electrode limitations prevent in-depth exploration, but
future research will benefit from higher precision recording
technologies.
STAR+METHODS
Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper and include
the following:
d KEY RESOURCES TABLE
d RESOURCE AVAILABILITY
B Lead contact
B Materials availability
B Data and code availability
d EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS
d METHOD DETAILS
B Surgical procedure
B Visual analog scales
B Recording and preprocessing of EEG and LFP data
B Preprocessing and power spectrum analysis
B Spatial clustering and regrouping
B Recurrent neural network and Naturalistic Music EEG dataset
B Music treatment
B Weighted phase lag index calculation
B Oscillatory activities identification
B Multiple temporal coupling identification
d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
celrep.2024.114474.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to express our gratitude to Shanghai Quanlan Technology Co.
Ltd. for technical support.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
X.L. proposed the research hypothesis, designed the experiments, conducted
data analysis, and drafted the paper. Y. Wang and Y.Z. collected experimental
data. S.M. and J.L. were responsible for coding. Y. Wu assisted with collecting
experimental data. V.V. controlled the design of this study and the collection of
the dataset. B.S. provided funding for the research.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
This study was funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China (82271515), the SJTU Trans-med Awards Research (2019015), the Scientific and Technological Innovation Action Plan of Shanghai (KY20211478),
and the Shanghai Municipal Science and Technology Major Project
(2021SHZDZX).

(D) Comparison of NAc gamma oscillation participants in gamma coupling events (paired t test, n = 8, p = 0.0023 for MODU UF versus SHAM UF; paired t test,
n = 5, p = 0.0074 for MODU FA versus SHAM FA).
(E) Internal temporal relationships within gamma coupling events in both the MODU subgroup and the SHAM subgroup under the UF background.
(F) Internal temporal relationships within gamma coupling events in both the MODU subgroup and the SHAM subgroup under the FA background.
(G) Comparison of the occurrence rate of triple time-locking events (paired t test, n = 8, p = 0.0019 for MODU UF versus SHAM UF; paired t test, n = 5, p = 0.0005
for MODU FA versus SHAM FA).
(H) Heatmap showing the synchronization analysis results between music and auditory cortical activity within the peri-triple time-locking time window. The three
panels from top to bottom represent the UF background of MODU and SHAM and the FA background of MODU.
(I) Comparison of the average peri-triple time-locking wPLI in the UF background of MODU (n = 134) and SHAM (n = 54), and the FA background of MODU (n =
205) (one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s test, UF MODU versus UF SHAM, p = 0.0227, UF SHAM versus FA MODU, p < 0.0001).
(J) In the UF background group, the wPLI is averaged at each time point within the peri-triple-time-locking time window, highlighting the trend of synchronization
between music and auditory cortical responses within the time window (n = 134 in UF MODU and n = 54 in UF SHAM). In the FA background group, the wPLI is
averaged at each time point within the peri-triple time-locking time window(n = 205 in FA MODU).The lines represent the mean theta waveform, and the shaded
area represents the standard deviation.
Cell Reports 43, 114474, August 27, 2024
13
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
Received: November 2, 2023
Revised: April 15, 2024
Accepted: June 24, 2024
Published: August 9, 2024
REFERENCES
1. Friedrich, M.J. (2017). Depression Is the Leading Cause of Disability
Around the World. JAMA 317, 1517. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.
2017.3826.
2. Gaynes, B.N., Lux, L., Gartlehner, G., Asher, G., Forman-Hoffman, V.,
Green, J., Boland, E., Weber, R.P., Randolph, C., Bann, C., et al. (2020).
Defining treatment-resistant depression. Depress. Anxiety 37, 134–145.
https://doi.org/10.1002/da.22968.
3. Zhu, Y., Wang, R., Tang, X., Li, Q., Xu, G., and Zhang, A. (2021). The effect
of music, massage, yoga and exercise on antenatal depression: A metaanalysis. J. Affect. Disord. 292, 592–602. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.
2021.05.122.
4. Koelsch, S. (2005). Investigating emotion with music: neuroscientific approaches. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1060, 412–418. https://doi.org/10.1196/
annals.1360.034.
5. Caria, A., Venuti, P., and de Falco, S. (2011). Functional and dysfunctional
brain circuits underlying emotional processing of music in autism spectrum disorders. Cereb. Cortex 21, 2838–2849. https://doi.org/10.1093/
cercor/bhr084.
6. Koelsch, S. (2010). Towards a neural basis of music-evoked emotions.
Trends Cogn. Sci. 14, 131–137. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2010.
01.002.
7. Koelsch, S. (2014). Brain correlates of music-evoked emotions. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 15, 170–180. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn3666.
8. Eldar, E., Ganor, O., Admon, R., Bleich, A., and Hendler, T. (2007). Feeling
the real world: limbic response to music depends on related content.
Cereb. Cortex 17, 2828–2840. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhm011.
9. Fruhholz, S., Trost, W., and Grandjean, D. (2014). The role of the medial €
temporal limbic system in processing emotions in voice and music.
Prog. Neurobiol. 123, 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pneurobio.2014.
09.003.
10. Zuk, N.J., Carney, L.H., and Lalor, E.C. (2018). Preferred Tempo and LowAudio-Frequency Bias Emerge From Simulated Sub-cortical Processing
of Sounds With a Musical Beat. Front. Neurosci. 12, 349. https://doi.org/
10.3389/fnins.2018.00349.
11. Zse´ li, G., Vida, B., Szilva´ sy-Szabo´ , A., To´ th, M., Lechan, R.M., and Fekete,
C. (2018). Neuronal connections of the central amygdalar nucleus with refeeding-activated brain areas in rats. Brain Struct. Funct. 223, 391–414.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00429-017-1501-4.
12. Avery, S.N., Clauss, J.A., and Blackford, J.U. (2016). The Human BNST:
Functional Role in Anxiety and Addiction. Neuropsychopharmacology
41, 126–141. https://doi.org/10.1038/npp.2015.185.
13. Bayless, D.W., Davis, C.H.O., Yang, R., Wei, Y., de Andrade Carvalho,
V.M., Knoedler, J.R., Yang, T., Livingston, O., Lomvardas, A., Martins,
G.J., et al. (2023). A neural circuit for male sexual behavior and reward.
Cell 186, 3862–3881.e28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2023.07.021.
14. Avery, S.N., Clauss, J.A., Winder, D.G., Woodward, N., Heckers, S., and
Blackford, J.U. (2014). BNST neurocircuitry in humans. Neuroimage 91,
311–323. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.01.017.
15. Lebow, M.A., and Chen, A. (2016). Overshadowed by the amygdala: the
bed nucleus of the stria terminalis emerges as key to psychiatric disorders.
Mol. Psychiatry 21, 450–463. https://doi.org/10.1038/mp.2016.1.
16. Koelsch, S., and Skouras, S. (2014). Functional centrality of amygdala,
striatum and hypothalamus in a "small-world" network underlying joy: an
fMRI study with music. Hum. Brain Mapp. 35, 3485–3498. https://doi.
org/10.1002/hbm.22416.
17. Zinsmaier, A.K., Dong, Y., and Huang, Y.H. (2022). Cocaine-induced projection-specific and cell type-specific adaptations in the nucleus accumbens. Mol. Psychiatry 27, 669–686. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-021-
01112-2.
18. Vendruscolo, L.F., Barbier, E., Schlosburg, J.E., Misra, K.K., Whitfield,
T.W., Jr., Logrip, M.L., Rivier, C., Repunte-Canonigo, V., Zorrilla, E.P.,
Sanna, P.P., et al. (2012). Corticosteroid-dependent plasticity mediates
compulsive alcohol drinking in rats. J. Neurosci. 32, 7563–7571. https://
doi.org/10.1523/jneurosci.0069-12.2012.
19. Xiao, Q., Zhou, X., Wei, P., Xie, L., Han, Y., Wang, J., Cai, A., Xu, F., Tu, J.,
and Wang, L. (2021). A new GABAergic somatostatin projection from the
BNST onto accumbal parvalbumin neurons controls anxiety. Mol. Psychiatry 26, 4719–4741. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-020-0816-3.
20. Kaas, J.H., and Hackett, T.A. (2000). Subdivisions of auditory cortex and
processing streams in primates. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97, 11793–
11799. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.97.22.11793.
21. Blood, A.J., and Zatorre, R.J. (2001). Intensely pleasurable responses to
music correlate with activity in brain regions implicated in reward and
emotion. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 11818–11823. https://doi.org/
10.1073/pnas.191355898.
22. Martorell, A.J., Paulson, A.L., Suk, H.J., Abdurrob, F., Drummond, G.T.,
Guan, W., Young, J.Z., Kim, D.N.W., Kritskiy, O., Barker, S.J., et al.
(2019). Multi-sensory Gamma Stimulation Ameliorates Alzheimer’s-Associated Pathology and Improves Cognition. Cell 177, 256–271.e22. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2019.02.014.
23. Schubert, E. (2007). The influence of emotion, locus of emotion and familiarity upon preference in music. Psychol. Music 35, 499–515.
24. Baumgartner, T., Willi, M., and Ja¨ ncke, L. (2007). Modulation of corticospinal activity by strong emotions evoked by pictures and classical music: a
transcranial magnetic stimulation study. Neuroreport 18, 261–265.
25. Tennant, M., Youssef, G.J., McGillivray, J., Clark, T.J., McMillan, L., and
McCarthy, M.C. (2020). Exploring the use of Immersive Virtual Reality to
enhance Psychological Well-Being in Pediatric Oncology: A pilot randomized controlled trial. Eur. J. Oncol. Nurs. 48, 101804. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.ejon.2020.101804.
26. Holz, E.M., Botrel, L., Kaufmann, T., and Kubler, A. (2015). Long-term in- €
dependent brain-computer interface home use improves quality of life of
a patient in the locked-in state: a case study. Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil.
96, S16–S26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apmr.2014.03.035.
27. Moulton, C.D., Strawbridge, R., Tsapekos, D., Oprea, E., Carter, B.,
Hayes, C., Cleare, A.J., Marwood, L., Mantingh, T., and Young, A.H.
(2021). The Maudsley 3-item Visual Analogue Scale (M3VAS): Validation
of a scale measuring core symptoms of depression. J. Affect. Disord.
282, 280–283. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2020.12.185.
28. Facco, E., Stellini, E., Bacci, C., Manani, G., Pavan, C., Cavallin, F., and
Zanette, G. (2013). Validation of visual analogue scale for anxiety
(VAS-A) in preanesthesia evaluation. Minerva Anestesiol. 79, 1389–1395.
29. Scangos, K.W., Khambhati, A.N., Daly, P.M., Makhoul, G.S., Sugrue, L.P.,
Zamanian, H., Liu, T.X., Rao, V.R., Sellers, K.K., Dawes, H.E., et al. (2021).
Closed-loop neuromodulation in an individual with treatment-resistant
depression. Nat. Med. 27, 1696–1700. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-
021-01480-w.
30. Howe, C.A., Clevenger, K.A., McElhiney, D., Mihalic, C., and Ragan, M.A.
(2019). Measurement of Children’s Real-Time Physical Activity Enjoyment
Using a New Visual Analog Scale. J. Phys. Act. Health 16, 406–415.
https://doi.org/10.1123/jpah.2018-0074.
31. Shukuroglou, M., Roseman, L., Wall, M., Nutt, D., Kaelen, M., and Carhart-Harris, R. (2023). Changes in music-evoked emotion and
ventral striatal functional connectivity after psilocybin therapy for
depression. J. Psychopharmacol. 37, 70–79. https://doi.org/10.1177/
02698811221125354.
32. Zhou, W., Ye, C., Wang, H., Mao, Y., Zhang, W., Liu, A., Yang, C.L., Li, T.,
Hayashi, L., Zhao, W., et al. (2022). Sound induces analgesia through
14
Cell Reports 43, 114474, August 27, 2024
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
corticothalamic circuits. Science 377, 198–204. https://doi.org/10.1126/
science.abn4663.
33. Miyapuram, K.P., Ahmad, N., Pandey, P., and Lomas, J.D. (2022). Electroencephalography (EEG) dataset during naturalistic music listening
comprising different genres with familiarity and enjoyment ratings. Data
Brief 45, 108663. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dib.2022.108663.
34. Buzsa´ ki, G., and Wang, X.-J. (2012). Mechanisms of gamma oscillations.
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 35, 203–225.
35. Nestler, E.J., and Carlezon, W.A., Jr. (2006). The mesolimbic dopamine
reward circuit in depression. Biol. Psychiatry 59, 1151–1159.
36. Kim, J., Gulati, T., and Ganguly, K. (2019). Competing Roles of Slow Oscillations and Delta Waves in Memory Consolidation versus Forgetting. Cell
179, 514–526.e13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2019.08.040.
37. Koelsch, S. (2020). A coordinate-based meta-analysis of music-evoked
emotions. Neuroimage 223, 117350. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.117350.
38. Adaikkan, C., Middleton, S.J., Marco, A., Pao, P.C., Mathys, H., Kim,
D.N.W., Gao, F., Young, J.Z., Suk, H.J., Boyden, E.S., et al. (2019).
Gamma Entrainment Binds Higher-Order Brain Regions and Offers Neuroprotection. Neuron 102, 929–943.e8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.
2019.04.011.
39. Iaccarino, H.F., Singer, A.C., Martorell, A.J., Rudenko, A., Gao, F., Gillingham, T.Z., Mathys, H., Seo, J., Kritskiy, O., Abdurrob, F., et al. (2016).
Gamma frequency entrainment attenuates amyloid load and modifies microglia. Nature 540, 230–235. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature20587.
40. Kompotis, K., Hubbard, J., Emmenegger, Y., Perrault, A., Muhlethaler, M., €
Schwartz, S., Bayer, L., and Franken, P. (2019). Rocking Promotes Sleep
in Mice through Rhythmic Stimulation of the Vestibular System. Curr. Biol.
29, 392–401.e4. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2018.12.007.
41. O¨ zturk-C € ¸ olak, A., Inami, S., Buchler, J.R., McClanahan, P.D., Cruz, A.,
Fang-Yen, C., and Koh, K. (2020). Sleep Induction by Mechanosensory
Stimulation in Drosophila. Cell Rep. 33, 108462. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.celrep.2020.108462.
42. Jaramillo, A.A., Brown, J.A., and Winder, D.G. (2021). Danger and distress:
Parabrachial-extended amygdala circuits. Neuropharmacology 198,
108757. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropharm.2021.108757.
43. Salimpoor, V.N., van den Bosch, I., Kovacevic, N., McIntosh, A.R., Dagher,
A., and Zatorre, R.J. (2013). Interactions between the nucleus accumbens
and auditory cortices predict music reward value. Science 340, 216–219.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1231059.
44. Oostenveld, R., Fries, P., Maris, E., and Schoffelen, J.M. (2011). FieldTrip:
Open source software for advanced analysis of MEG, EEG, and invasive
electrophysiological data. Comput. Intell. Neurosci. 2011, 156869.
https://doi.org/10.1155/2011/156869.
45. Neudorfer, C., Butenko, K., Oxenford, S., Rajamani, N., Achtzehn, J.,
Goede, L., Hollunder, B., Rı´os, A.S., Hart, L., Tasserie, J., et al. (2023).
Lead-DBS v3.0: Mapping deep brain stimulation effects to local anatomy
and global networks. Neuroimage 268, 119862. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
neuroimage.2023.119862.
46. Zheng, Y.P., Zhao, J.P., Phillips, M., Liu, J.B., Cai, M.F., Sun, S.Q., and
Huang, M.F. (1988). Validity and reliability of the Chinese Hamilton Depression Rating Scale. Br. J. Psychiatry 152, 660–664. https://doi.org/10.1192/
bjp.152.5.660.
47. Buzsa´ ki, G., and Schomburg, E.W. (2015). What does gamma coherence
tell us about inter-regional neural communication? Nat. Neurosci. 18,
484–489. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.3952.
48. Buzsa´ ki, G., and Wang, X.J. (2012). Mechanisms of gamma oscillations.
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 35, 203–225. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurevneuro-062111-150444.
49. Colgin, L.L. (2013). Mechanisms and functions of theta rhythms. Annu.
Rev. Neurosci. 36, 295–312. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-neuro-
062012-170330.
50. Jadhav, S.P., Rothschild, G., Roumis, D.K., and Frank, L.M. (2016). Coordinated Excitation and Inhibition of Prefrontal Ensembles during Awake
Hippocampal Sharp-Wave Ripple Events. Neuron 90, 113–127. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2016.02.010.
51. Sauseng, P., Peylo, C., Biel, A.L., Friedrich, E.V.C., and Romberg-Taylor,
C. (2019). Does cross-frequency phase coupling of oscillatory brain activity contribute to a better understanding of visual working memory? Br. J.
Psychol. 110, 245–255. https://doi.org/10.1111/bjop.12340.
52. Malerba, P., and Kopell, N. (2013). Phase resetting reduces theta-gamma
rhythmic interaction to a one-dimensional map. J. Math. Biol. 66, 1361–
1386. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00285-012-0534-9.
53. Maingret, N., Girardeau, G., Todorova, R., Goutierre, M., and Zugaro, M.
(2016). Hippocampo-cortical coupling mediates memory consolidation
during sleep. Nat. Neurosci. 19, 959–964. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nn.4304.
Cell Reports 43, 114474, August 27, 2024
15
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
STAR+METHODS
KEY RESOURCES TABLE


REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Experimental models: Organisms/strains
Ruijin Hospital of the Shanghai Jiaotong
University School of Medicine
Human subject
Table S1

Software and algorithms
MATLAB R2022a The MathWorks Inc., Natick, USA RRID:SCR_001622
MATLAB toolbox filedtrip Oostenveld et al.44 https://www.fieldtriptoolbox.org
MATLAB toolbox lead-DBS Neudorfer et al.45 RRID:SCR_002915
MATLAB oscillation analysis This paper See the code provided in the supplemental file
MATLAB Deep Learning toolbox The MathWorks Inc., Natick, USA https://www.mathworks.com/products/deep-learning.html
Adobe Auditor Adobe Audition, USA RRID:SCR_015796
NeuroExplorer Plexon, USA RRID:SCR_001818
Other
EEG recording device Brain Products, Germany RRID:SCR_009443
CT scan device Philips CT, Netherlands N/A
MRI scan device Philips 3.0T, Netherlands N/A
Naturalistic Music EEG Dataset Miyapuram et al.33 https://exhibits.stanford.edu/data/catalog/jn859kj8079
Headphones Philips Audio, SHP9500 N/A
Hamilton Depression Rating Scale Zheng et al.46 https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.152.5.660
Pyotr Il0yich Tchaikovsky
Ludwig van Beethoven
Antonio Vivaldi
Johann Sebastian Bach
Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart
Ludwig van Beethoven
Franz Schubert
Pyotr Il0yich Tchaikovsky
Johann Pachelbel
"Symphony No. 7 in A Major, Op.
92, Third Movement"
Symphony No. 6 in B minor, Op.
74 ‘Pathe´ tique’
Pyotr Il0yich Tchaikovsky https://www.classicalarchives.com/newca/#!/Work/28456
"Waltz of the Flowers" from The
Nutcracker Suite, Op. 71a
Piano Sonata No. 14 in C-sharp minor,
Op. 27, No. 2 ‘Moonlight Sonata’
Ellens Gesang III (‘Ave Maria’),
D. 839, Op. 52, No. 6
Air on the G String from Orchestral
Suite No. 3 in D Major, BWV 1068
Johann Sebastian Bach https://www.classicalarchives.com/newca/#!/Work/3198
https://www.classicalarchives.com/newca/#!/Work/19010
"Romanze" from Eine kleine Nachtmusik
(Serenade No. 13 for strings in
G major, K. 525)
Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart https://www.classicalarchives.com/newca/#!/Work/19010
https://www.classicalarchives.com/newca/#!/Work/28456
"Spring" from The Four Seasons
(Violin Concerto in E major,
Op. 8, No. 1, RV 269)
Antonio Vivaldi https://www.classicalarchives.com/newca/#!/Work/29686
https://www.classicalarchives.com/newca/#!/Work/29686
https://www.classicalarchives.com/newca/#!/Work/4216
https://www.classicalarchives.com/newca/#!/Work/3198
https://www.classicalarchives.com/newca/#!/Work/3962
Canon in D, for 3 violins and continuo
(‘Pachelbel’s Canon’), T.337
Johann Pachelbel https://www.classicalarchives.com/newca/#!/Work/48526
https://www.classicalarchives.com/newca/#!/Work/48857
https://www.classicalarchives.com/newca/#!/Work/25137
https://www.classicalarchives.com/newca/#!/Work/48526
Visual analog scale-Depression Moulton et al.27 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2020.12.185
Visual analog scale-Anxiety Facco et al.28 https://www.researchgate.net/publication/
249966196_Validation_Of_Visual_Analogue_
Scale_For_Anxiety_Vas-A_In_
Preanesthesia_Evaluation
Visual analog scale-Enjoyment Howe et al.30 https://doi.org/10.1123/jpah.2018-0074
16
Cell Reports 43, 114474, August 27, 2024
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
RESOURCE AVAILABILITY
Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Bomin Sun
(bomin_sun@163.com).
Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents.
Data and code availability
Local field potential signal data, CT and MRI images reported in this paper will be shared by the lead contact upon request. All original
code is available in this paper’s supplemental information. Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this
paper is available from the lead contact upon request.
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS
Twenty-three patients were recruited who met diagnostic criteria of the ICD-10 (International Classification of Diseases) for recurrent
depressive disorder and the following criteria: age between 18 and 65 years old; current duration of depressive episode longer than
two years or repeated episodes with more than four episodes (current episode duration R1 year); treatment-resistant depression,
defined as poor response to at least three full-dose and full-course (more than 8 weeks) treatments, including at least two antidepressant drugs with different mechanisms of action and intolerance or poor response to non-convulsive electrotherapy; symptom
severity, as measured by a score of at least 17 on the Hamilton Depression Scale-17 (HAMD-17). Patient safety and the potential
negative effects of music on their condition were monitored through weekly HAMD-17 assessments. If a patient’s HAMD-17 score
exceeded their baseline score, it was considered a worsening of symptoms, and the patient was required to withdraw from the study
and receive antidepressant treatment. Four participants reported experiencing negative emotions induced by listening to familiar but
disliked music, making it difficult for them to adhere to the experimental protocol. However, these participants chose to continue the
study voluntarily. Additionally, none of these patients had HAMD-17 scores that exceeded their baseline levels, thus the mandatory
withdrawal mechanism was not triggered.
All participants self-identified as Asian, and their gender identities were consistent with their biological sex. All patients self-reported that they had no prior experience of listening to classical music and had not heard these two pieces of music before. The participants in this study mainly come from a group of patients who have undergone electrode implantation and are to be treated for TRD
using deep brain stimulation therapy. The study protocol was approved by the Ruijin Hospital Ethics Committee of the Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine. All enrolled patients and their legal representatives were required to sign a formal informed consent before enrollment. Because of the small sample size and the consistence of the majority of most information, the analyses of the
sex, gender, ancestry, race and ethnicity, socioeconomic status of patients were not performed in this study. A supplementary table
of patients’ demographic information is available.
METHOD DETAILS
Surgical procedure
For the purpose of treating TRD, patients included in this study underwent electrode placement for deep brain stimulation therapy.
Relevant clinical studies were approved by the Ruijin Hospital Ethics Committee of the Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine. In this study, electrodes were only used for recording local field potential signals. Additionally, to avoid interference from lesion
effects, any procedures were performed 30 days after electrode implantation. The pre-surgical plan involved the insertion of electrodes through multiple targets. CT-stereotactic guidance and pre-operative MRI were utilized to implant the DBS leads while patients were under general anesthesia (Figures 1A–1C). Model SR1202-S electrodes were employed in this study, with a diameter
of 1.27 mm in diameter (SceneRay, SR1202-S) were employed in this study consisting of eight cylindrical contacts, each measuring
1.5 mm in length. Each contact was 1.5mm in length and separated by 0.5mm. The adjacent contacts were separated by a distance
of 0.5 mm. We used Lead-DBS software to reconstruct and localize the electrodes. The location of electrodes and nuclei are presented in Fig.S1A. The electrode was placed at the NAc and passed through the BNST.
Visual analog scales
To precisely capture music-induced emotional responses, this study utilized three VAS scales: VAS-D (Depression), VAS-A (Anxiety),
and VAS-E (Enjoyment). For VAS-D assessment, participants used a mouse to slide freely along a 10 cm horizontal bar, with the screen
displaying the prompt, ‘‘Please describe the level of your current depressive feelings.’’ One end of the bar was labeled 0, ‘‘No feeling,’’
and the other endwas labeled 100, ‘‘Very intense feeling.’’Participantsmarked a point on this line to indicate their subjective perception
of the intensity of the feeling. The VAS-A and VAS-E followed the same procedure, with prompts reading ‘‘Please describe the level of
your current anxiety feelings’’ and ‘‘Please describe the level of your enjoyment of the music segment,’’ respectively.
Cell Reports 43, 114474, August 27, 2024
17
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
Recording and preprocessing of EEG and LFP data
Local field potential data were recorded using the BrainAmp MR amplifier from Brain Products at a sampling rate of 1000 Hz. EEG data
were captured with Brain Products’ 64-channel saline EEG cap, R-Net. Both EEG and LFP signals were captured synchronously. For
this study, data from six channels on both sides of the temporal area were retained and subsequently averaged, including T7, T8, FT7,
FT8, TP7 and TP8 of the 64-channel EEG. Real-time data referencing utilized the left mastoid electrode, with the nose tip serving as the
ground. Offline preprocessing and analysis of the LFP data were carried out using MATLAB 2022a. Recording contacts selection was
informed by lead-DBS reconstructions, specifically focusing on contact points within the BNST and NAc. These contacts underwent
bipolar re-referencing by subtracting values from their adjacent counterparts, ensuring activity localized to the BNST-NAc circuit and
negating any volume-conducted interference from distant brain regions. To refine the data, a two-way IIR Butterworth filter was employed, mitigating direct current bias below 1 Hz and filtering out 50 Hz power line disturbances and its harmonics.
Preprocessing and power spectrum analysis
Before the analysis, the sampling rate was reset at 500 Hz, and recorded LFP was band-pass filtered at 1–100 Hz (IIR Butterworth
filter) with 1 dB of bandpass attenuation to minimize contamination by movement artifact. Power spectral density (PSD) analysis was
mainly performed in MATLAB, which was extracted by the method of Welch periodogram (in detail, MATLAB function pwelch). We
used a fast Fourier transform (FFT) of 4,096 points with 50% overlap and multi-taper methods (time-bandwidth product = 3, number
of tapers = 5) to decrease edge effects. Before further statistical analysis, power from the PSD was normalized. All of the analyses in
this period were calculated in MATLAB software (MATLAB 2022a; The MathWorks, Inc., Natick, MA).
Spatial clustering and regrouping
Patients were regrouped according to their response to the music. Three visual scales were used to classification: the VAS-D, VAS-A,
VAS-E. To determine the decision boundary between two distinct data clusters, a function was designed. This function operates in
the following manner. First, the three input vectors VAS-D, VAS-A, and VAS-E are consolidated into a single data matrix, where each
column of the matrix represents a vector. The consolidated data undergoes clustering via the k-means spatial clustering, which segregates the data into two distinct classes. The resultant labels from this clustering serve as the classifications for the given data. The
clustering operation was implemented using the kmeans function in MATLAB. Upon completion of clustering, the decision boundary
between the two groups was obtained through training a K-nearest neighbor classifier. Following the re-grouping, we validated the
reliability of the grouping criteria through two methods. Firstly, for the clustering process, we computed its Davies-Bouldin index,
which resulted in 0.22. Additionally, based on post-experiment interviews conducted at the end of the trials, participants were asked
a binary question regarding whether they enjoyed the music played during the experiment. The results of this post-hoc validation
were entirely consistent with the clustering classification results. Therefore, it can be inferred that the classification process based
on clustering and post-hoc validation is fundamentally reliable.
Recurrent neural network and Naturalistic Music EEG dataset
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) were employed for predicting individuals’ music appreciation based on temporal lobe EEG. Due to
limited intracranial data throughput, an external Naturalistic Music EEG Dataset was utilized for RNN training (https://exhibits.
stanford.edu/data/catalog/jn859kj8079).30 This dataset includes cortical (EEG) and behavioral data collected during natural music
listening, recorded from 20 adult participants exposed to 10 full-length songs with electronically produced beats at varying tempos.
The training set comprised 80% of the dataset, the test set 20%, and data from depressed patients formed the validation set.
The dataset is divided in the RNN as follows.The mean temporal EEG signals across different channels from individual trials were
used as input, with music appreciation levels serving as category labels. These labels were categorized into high and low appreciation groups based on whether they exceeded 50% of the maximum score. For dataset segmentation, 80% of the Naturalistic Music
EEG dataset was randomly selected as the training set, with the remaining 20% used as the test set. Additionally, the TRD music
treatment EEG data was designated as the validation set. This partitioning was designed to ensure sufficient variance between
the training and validation datasets. Both datasets encompassed a diverse range of racial backgrounds, cultural influences, music
genres, and medical histories, reducing the risk of overfitting. The Naturalistic Music EEG dataset encompasses data from 64 EEG
channels, with channels identified as temporal lobe EEG being extracted. The average value of these channels, combined with individual music appreciation levels, served as input for the RNN’s supervised classification task. The RNN’s basic units were Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) modules. The first layer, receiving the input data, consisted of 512 LSTM units, followed by a Rectified
Linear Unit (ReLU) module with a 50% dropout rate. The number of LSTM units in the second layer was halved to 256. The third layer
contained 128 LSTM units, and the fourth had 64 ReLU units. Each ReLU layer had a consistent 50% dropout rate. The fifth layer was
a fully connected layer, providing classification results through a softmax regression processing layer. In the RNN, the learning rate
was set at 0.05, and learning rate drop occurred every 10 epochs, with the drop factor set to 0.95. MATLAB 2022a with the Deep
Learning Toolbox (https://www.mathworks.com/products/deep-learning.html) was used for the entire training period.
Music treatment
To differentiate the impact of familiarity on the depression-alleviating effects of music, 23 participants were divided into two groups,
with 13 participants exposed to unfamiliar music and the remaining 10 participants exposed to familiar music. All participants,
18
Cell Reports 43, 114474, August 27, 2024
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
particularly those listening to unfamiliar music, lacked prior exposure to classical music appreciation due to their Asian cultural background. In this subgroup, participants directly listened to both types of music with different emotional orientations.
For participants exposed to familiar music, we employed the following method to ensure they were at a relatively high and similar
level of familiarity. Firstly, we compiled a list of 8 musical excerpts, which were outside of their listening history. Details about the
music used can be found in the key resources table. Participants listened to this music list three times a day for 14 consecutive
days, and on the final day, they rated the music in the list based on their preference level. After obtaining these ratings, the 10 participants were randomly divided into two groups. One group listened to the music excerpt with the highest preference level in the
subsequent experiment, while the other group listened to the excerpt with the lowest preference level. These music excerpt ratings
needed to not only meet the highest/lowest criteria but also exceed/fall below the mean rating by plus/minus one standard deviation.
After selecting the familiar music excerpts, the participants underwent a session of listening to the music and simultaneous recording
of EEG-LFP signals on the following day’s experiment.
The music treatments were administered in the EEG recording room at Ruijin Hospital, which was soundproofed. During the
listening sessions, each patient was placed alone in a quiet room measuring approximately 5 square meters. There were no background noises present. Throughout the process, two psychiatrists and one experimenter monitored the patients to ensure their
safety. The quantity, duration, and frequency of the music treatments varied slightly depending on the patients’ grouping conditions.
Participants used Phillips SHP9500 headphones, and the sound level was maintained at approximately 75dB. To minimize artifacts in
the EEG recordings, patients were not allowed to freely adjust the volume. Instead, short sounds were played before the experiment
began, and patients were asked if they were comfortable with the volume. For the generation of external sound, we created a series of
sine waves with specific amplitudes at intervals of 0.1Hz within the frequency bands of 40-44Hz and 160-164Hz. The former serves as
the stimulus source for the modulation group, while the latter serves as the stimulus source for the Sham group. Finally, these sine
waves were superimposed to produce two types of regulatory noises. The sound generation was conducted in MATLAB 2022a, while
the blending of the noise with the music waveform was done in Adobe Audition 2021.
Weighted phase lag index calculation
For the coherence between the temporal EEG data and the music waveform, Based on the z-transformed data, we calculate the
weighted phase lag index (wPLI) of the two waveforms using a sliding window, where the width of the sliding time window is set
at 1000ms, and the sliding range is 0.5 times the window width. The wPLI analysis method begins by performing a fast Fourier transform (FFT) on two time series signals to obtain their frequency domain representation. Following that, the cross power spectral density of the two signals in the frequency domain is calculated, with a particular focus on its imaginary part, to describe the phase relationship between the two signals. The calculation of the wPLI index is based on the ratio between the sum of the absolute values of
the imaginary part of the cross spectrum and the absolute value of the sum of the imaginary part. This index represents the weighted
phase coherence between the two signals, providing a measure of their synchronization.
Oscillatory activities identification
For gamma oscillation identification, the pre-processed LFP recorded from BNST and NAc was used. A bandpass filter (Butterworth
filter, MATLAB2022a) was used to extract data between 30Hz and 100Hz. Then, the envelope of the filtered data was calculated using
the Hilbert transform. Peaks in the data that exceeded the mean value plus 2 times the standard deviation, or that were below the
mean value minus 2 times the standard deviation were identified.
To ensure genuine gamma oscillations, differences between adjacent peaks were computed. Peaks with intervals greater than
25ms from adjacent ones were selected to avoid detecting closely spaced peaks, possibly from the same gamma oscillation event.
The starting and ending time points of each valid peak were determined by tracing back and forward from the peak until values dropped below the mean plus the standard deviation. Peak amplitude and duration were computed for each valid gamma oscillation..47,48
For theta oscillation identification, a bandpass filter was applied to the temporal EEG data, targeting the frequency range of 4Hz–
8Hz, with a resampling rate set at 500Hz. Following this, the envelope of the filtered data was computed using the Hilbert transform.
Peaks that exceeded the mean value plus one standard deviation were identified, and valleys that went below the mean value minus
one standard deviation were also identified. Peaks with an interval greater than 25ms from the next peak were selected by calculating
differences between adjacent peaks. For each valid peak, the starting time point of the theta oscillation was determined by tracing
back from the peak until it fell below the mean value plus one standard deviation, and similarly, the ending time point was identified by
tracing forward until it fell below the mean value plus one standard deviation. The duration was constrained to be between 100ms and
500ms.49
For the extraction of instantaneous phase relationship between theta and gamma oscillation, the Hilbert-Huang transform was utilized to extract the continuous theta phase. At the peak timing points of gamma oscillations, the instantaneous phase of theta was
extracted.50
Multiple temporal coupling identification
The temporal coupling of gamma oscillation relative to theta waves was analyzed. For the nesting of gamma to theta (which was
defined as theta-gamma nesting), the time difference (DT) between the peak of the gamma and the negative phase of the closest
theta wave.51,52 The nesting time window was set as 50 ms–100 ms. The theta-nested gamma was identified if the DT located
Cell Reports 43, 114474, August 27, 2024 19
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
in this time window. Events who met the following standard were excluded: gamma which start or endpoint exceeds the range of
theta activity, identified sequential events of less than 100ms, and more than one gamma wave nested to the same theta wave. Nesting index was calculated to quantitatively assess the changes in nesting activities of gamma to theta.36 Detailly, the time lag of
gamma to their nearest theta was measured for each gamma event and the rate of gamma of which DT was within the nesting
time window was calculated.
After identifying the gamma oscillation activity in the local field potentials of BNST and NAc, the gamma-gamma coupling between
the two functional areas was calculated as follows: For every gamma oscillation peak in the BNST, if a gamma oscillation peak in the
NAc occurred within 50ms, they were determined to be gamma-gamma coupled. To exclude the influence of noise, the same calculation method was also applied within the BNST and NAc individually. If no coupling was found within a single nucleus, the data for
that trial was considered valid. For the temporal distribution of gamma coupling, we calculated the distribution of the NAc’s gamma
oscillation peak values centered around the time point of the BNST’s gamma oscillation peak. Triple-timing locking is defined as a
gamma oscillation in the BNST that is simultaneously nested by temporal lobe theta activity and coupled with NAc gamma
oscillation.53
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Statistical analyses were calculated using GraphPad Prism 8.0. Experimenters who were blind to experimental conditions analyzed
the data. Statistical features including the definitions and exact values of n (e.g., number of trials), p-values, and the type of statistical
tests can be found in the Figure legends or Supplementary materials. For comparisons of two groups, we conducted paired t-tests.
For comparisons among three groups, we conducted one-way ANOVAs with correction methods for multiple comparisons. For all
analyses, statistical tests were two-tailed, and the confidence interval was set at 95%. For all figures, the boxplot was composed by
the median, the approximate quartiles, and the lowest and highest data points. The horizontal line represented the mean. Statistical
significance was set at p < 0.05. * indicated p < 0.05, ** indicated p < 0.01, *** indicated p < 0.001, **** indicated p < 0.0001.
20
Cell Reports 43, 114474, August 27, 2024
